# Dev Diary 1 (Monday, May 12, 2025)
## A Simple Introduction, A New Challenge Approaches
- Updated Monday, May 26, 2025

I have to hand it to free and open-source (FOSS) code projects that they offer a great way to learn foundational skills and aspects of coding.

Run a search with the keywords "github," "projects," "learn how to," and "introduction" and you will find a treasure trove of projects that are geared toward learning simple basics of development frameworks and technologies. Build a website, build a mobile app, build a game engine, an operating system, build a web browser extension.

Wanting to learn more about browser extensions, I decided to check some projects out. I landed on a introductory web development repository under Microsoft's GitHub profile. Among the twelve projects within it there was a one focused on browser extension development. 

Called "Carbon Tracker," it's meant to have the user input a region and an API key to connect to a web service called CO2 Signal that tracks carbon emissions around the world. Included with the starter code were detailed but easy-to-understand descriptions of what browser extensions are and how they work. 

It took me through step by step for implementing the code, such as HTML, CSS, and the basic JavaScript required to start up the browser extension and to create a user interface (UI). What I found particularly helpful were the explanations given for each block of new code.

However, if there's something I've become aware of when learning a new skill, it's that something can be simple to learn but challenging to master.

Hence the title of this entry.

I've encountered two particular challenges during this project. (Actually, there's a third challenge, albeit a minor one. But I'll get to that in a bit.)

Admittedly, one these challenges was of my own doing and I knew that going in.

Most of the development I've ever done has been on a Windows OS, mainly due to the (seemingly) straightforwardness of getting a development environment ready. The problem that I have encountered (and I'm sure other developers out there can attest) is that over the course of time, my computer becomes entangled by an assortment of different frameworks and libraries for different projects. 

This time around, I wanted to deal with less development 'clutter' in the long run. If I ever needed to tidy up a project or clean up my computer, I wanted to have to do as little "hunting" as possible.

Which is what brought me to reconsider something that a former colleague once told me about: **Windows Subsystem Linux (or WSL)**. 

For years, I've shied away from immersing myself into a Linux environment. As a software developer, this is something you cannot get away from, considering that the Linux kernel is foundational to many of the technologies we use today (from servers to the Android operating system). I've known a few bash commands here and there, but my only genuine reason for avoiding Linux entirely was feeling insecure that I didn't know much about using it beyond a toe-dipping effort.

"But really", I asked myself, "why not give a shot?"

The short version of WSL is that it's a light-weight, virtualized instance of Linux (typically the Ubuntu distro) within a Windows environment. There's no UI other than command line interface (CLI). No frills, nothing super fancy; perfect for a development workshop. I can install what I need, when I need it, and remove it at my leisure. Best of all, the files in WSL are accessible from Windows meaning that I can use my coding editor (eg. Visual Studio Code) directly.

The installation of WSL from the Windows store was fairly simple. What was unclear was the kind of setup and tuning that I would need to get it ready for web development.

This calls for research! It is paradoxically both my one of my favourite things to do in development and also the dreaded bane of my existence. It's engaging for me as I come across new information as I attempt to solve a problem, but as this drags on, the hours in my day can become full of trying to find the right command or solution or block of code. And working on something solo means you don't have a teammate readily on hand to consult. Forums can be useful, but you may not always find the answer you're looking for.

This is where I turned to ChatGPT. First, I asked it to assume the role of an expert in teaching Linux commands and web development. I queried my problem, that I wanted to set up a WSL space for web development, asking what steps should be taken. Part of this involved the application's "Search" functionality.

Of course, I wasn't going to go and immediately run every bash command that a generative AI suggested. One: I'm doing this to learn something. Two: That would be like going ahead and trying to delete the `System32` file from Windows.

The guide that ChatGPT generated included the links for the sites where it sourced the information. That way I could go and see the context for that information (ie. bash command). It also served as a starting point for additional manual web searches so that I could verify what the AI had suggested. ChatGPT was also useful for clarifying aspects of its output. A couple times I had questions about certain lines of code or libraries. I could expand further on these explanations by highlighting certain text from the output and writing a query about them.

As I went along the process I took notes of details I found important and also wrote out questions that I wanted to follow-up on. After a bit of time, I felt good to go.

See, Linux isn't so scary after all.

The second challenge brought to mind an old software development meme: 
1) My code *doesn't work* and I don't know why. 
2) My code *works* and I don't know why.

Tale as old as time.

As I wrote above, the documentation for the browser extension project is well-detailed and the steps involving blocks of code include understandable explanations. At the point when I had what I needed implemented, I was moderately surprised to find the UI layout to be not at all what the HTML and JavaScript should have rendered. Plus, the console log had produced a couple of errors.

Thinking I may have written something incorrectly, I went back through the documentation and my code. Double-checking lines, adding some `console.log()` functions at various points, adding comments to note what certain blocks were *meant* to do.

Then I had a thought: What about the API? Could the key be wrong? Am I calling it incorrectly?

No, the key was fine, but the API in the original project was very different from the one I now had. The Microsoft version called on an API from www.co2signal.com. What I found instead when I visited the website to set up an API for myself was a site called ElectricityMap. If I had to guess, CO2 Signal was acquired by ElectricityMaps at some point and the API had been changed in the interim.

So, this project was no longer a simple matter of "following the guide step-by-step". Now, I had to do some experimentation. 

Well, then, cue the music, get out the pencil and paper; let's cook!

